crates/languages/cb-lang-go/README.md, before:

# cb-lang-go - Go Language Plugin for Codebuddy

Complete Go language support plugin implementing the `LanguageIntelligencePlugin` trait.

## Features

### ✅ Import Analysis
- Full AST-based import parsing using Go's native parser
- Fallback regex-based parsing when `go` command is unavailable
- Support for all Go import styles:
  - Single imports: `import "fmt"`
  - Grouped imports: `import ( "fmt"; "os" )`
  - Aliased imports: `import f "fmt"`
  - Dot imports: `import . "fmt"`
  - Blank imports: `import _ "database/sql"`
- External dependency detection
- Complete `ImportGraph` generation with metadata

### ✅ Symbol Extraction
- AST-based symbol extraction for:
  - Functions (regular and methods)
  - Structs
  - Interfaces
  - Constants
  - Variables
  - Type aliases
- Documentation comment extraction
- Method receiver detection
- Graceful fallback when Go toolchain unavailable (returns empty list)

### ✅ Manifest Support (go.mod)
- Complete `go.mod` parsing:
  - Module directive
  - Go version directive
  - Require directives (direct and indirect dependencies)
  - Replace directives (local path and module replacements)
  - Exclude directives
- Dependency extraction and categorization
- Dependency version updates
- Manifest generation for new modules

### ✅ Refactoring Support
- Module file location for Go package layout
- Import statement parsing from files
- Import rewriting for file renames
- Module reference finding with configurable scope
- Manifest generation

## Architecture

The plugin uses a **dual-mode approach** for maximum compatibility:

### 1. AST Mode (Primary)
- Embeds `resources/ast_tool.go` as a subprocess tool
- Leverages Go's native `go/ast` and `go/parser` packages
- Provides accurate parsing with full language support
- Requires Go toolchain to be installed

### 2. Regex Mode (Fallback)
- Pure Rust regex-based parsing
- Works in environments without Go installed
- Handles basic import detection
- Symbol extraction returns empty list in fallback mode

This ensures the plugin **works everywhere** while providing full features when Go is available.

## Project Structure

```
crates/languages/cb-lang-go/
├── Cargo.toml              # Dependencies and package metadata
├── README.md               # This file
├── resources/
│   └── ast_tool.go         # Embedded Go AST analysis tool (354 lines)
└── src/
    ├── lib.rs              # Main plugin implementation (280 lines)
    ├── manifest.rs         # go.mod parsing and manipulation (657 lines)
    └── parser.rs           # Import and symbol extraction (357 lines)
```

**Total: ~1,648 lines of code (including tests and docs)**

## Implementation Status

| Feature | Status | Lines | Tests |
|---------|--------|-------|-------|
| Symbol extraction | ✅ Complete | 108 | ✅ |
| Import parsing | ✅ Complete | 253 | ✅ |
| Manifest parsing | ✅ Complete | 416 | ✅ 9 tests |
| Dependency updates | ✅ Complete | 64 | ✅ |
| Manifest generation | ✅ Complete | 7 | ✅ |
| Module file location | ✅ Complete | 48 | ⚠️ Integration needed |
| Import rewriting | ✅ Complete | 38 | ⚠️ Integration needed |
| Module references | ✅ Complete | 48 | ⚠️ Integration needed |

**Overall: 95% Complete** (needs integration tests)

## Usage

### Parsing Go Source

```rust
use cb_lang_go::GoPlugin;
use cb_plugin_api::LanguageIntelligencePlugin;

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let plugin = GoPlugin::new();

    let source = r#"
    package main

    import "fmt"

    // HelloWorld prints hello
    func HelloWorld() {
        fmt.Println("Hello, World!")
    }

    // User represents a user
    type User struct {
        Name string
        Age  int
    }

    const MaxUsers = 100
    "#;

    // Parse and extract symbols
    let parsed = plugin.parse(source).await?;

    for symbol in &parsed.symbols {
        println!("{:?} {} at line {}", symbol.kind, symbol.name, symbol.location.line);
    }
    // Output:
    // Function HelloWorld at line 7
    // Struct User at line 12
    // Constant MaxUsers at line 17

    Ok(())
}
```

### Analyzing go.mod

```rust
use cb_lang_go::GoPlugin;
use cb_plugin_api::LanguageIntelligencePlugin;
use std::path::Path;

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let plugin = GoPlugin::new();

    let manifest = plugin.analyze_manifest(Path::new("go.mod")).await?;

    println!("Module: {}", manifest.name);
    println!("Go version: {}", manifest.version);

    for dep in &manifest.dependencies {
        println!("Dependency: {}", dep.name);
    }

    Ok(())
}
```

### Updating Dependencies

```rust
use cb_lang_go::GoPlugin;
use cb_plugin_api::LanguageIntelligencePlugin;
use std::path::Path;

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let plugin = GoPlugin::new();

    let updated_content = plugin
        .update_dependency(
            Path::new("go.mod"),
            "github.com/user/old",
            "github.com/user/new",
            Some("v1.2.3")
        )
        .await?;

    println!("Updated go.mod:\n{}", updated_content);

    Ok(())
}
```

## Testing

### Run Unit Tests

```bash
cargo test -p cb-lang-go
```

**Current results: 12 tests passing ✅**

```
running 12 tests
test manifest::tests::test_generate_manifest ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_go_mod_with_indirect ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_simple_go_mod ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_exclude ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_replace_with_version ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_go_mod_with_replace ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_single_line_require ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_update_dependency ... ok
test parser::tests::test_is_external_dependency ... ok
test parser::tests::test_parse_go_imports_regex ... ok
test parser::tests::test_extract_symbols_graceful_fallback ... ok
test parser::tests::test_analyze_imports ... ok
```

### Run Clippy

```bash
cargo clippy -p cb-lang-go
```

Note: There's a pending clippy warning in `cb-plugin-api` (unused `Arc` import) that's outside the scope of this crate.

## Structured Logging

All logging follows the structured key-value format per `docs/development/LOGGING_GUIDELINES.md`:

```rust
// ✅ Correct structured logging
debug!(module = %go_mod.module, dependencies_count = dependencies.len(), "Parsed go.mod successfully");
warn!(dependency = %dep_name, "Dependency not found in go.mod");
debug!(error = %e, "Go AST parsing failed, falling back to regex");
```

**Compliance: 100%** - All 6 log statements use structured format ✅

## Dependencies

```toml
[dependencies]
# Codebuddy workspace
cb-plugin-api = { path = "../../cb-plugin-api" }
cb-protocol = { path = "../../cb-protocol" }

# Async
async-trait = { workspace = true }
tokio = { workspace = true }

# Serialization
serde = { workspace = true }
serde_json = { workspace = true }

# Go-specific
regex = "1.10"           # Fallback import parsing
tempfile = "3.10"        # Temp dir for ast_tool.go
chrono = { version = "0.4", features = ["serde"] }

# Error handling
thiserror = { workspace = true }

# Logging
tracing = { workspace = true }
```

## Plugin Registration

The plugin is automatically registered in:
- `crates/cb-handlers/src/language_plugin_registry.rs:40`
- `crates/cb-services/src/services/file_service.rs:67` (tests)

```rust
registry.register(Arc::new(cb_lang_go::GoPlugin::new()));
```

## Comparison with Rust Plugin

| Metric | Rust Plugin | Go Plugin | Status |
|--------|-------------|-----------|--------|
| **Total LOC** | 1,346 lines | 1,294 lines | ✅ Comparable |
| **Files** | 3 (lib, parser, manifest) | 3 (lib, parser, manifest) | ✅ Same structure |
| **Symbol extraction** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| **Manifest support** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| **Import parsing** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| **Refactoring methods** | ✅ 8 methods | ✅ 8 methods | ✅ Full parity |
| **Test coverage** | ✅ 9 tests | ✅ 12 tests | ✅ Excellent |
| **Documentation** | ✅ Complete | ✅ Complete | ✅ Comprehensive |

**Result: Full feature parity achieved ✅**

## Next Steps

### Recommended Improvements

1. **Integration Tests** (1-2 hours)
   - Add integration tests using real Go projects
   - Test with actual MCP tool calls
   - Verify end-to-end workflows

2. **Performance Optimization** (Optional)
   - Cache ast_tool.go process between calls
   - Reuse temp directory for multiple operations
   - Benchmark symbol extraction performance

3. **Enhanced Error Messages** (Optional)
   - Add more context to parse errors
   - Include file path in error messages
   - Provide suggestions for common issues

4. **Documentation** (Optional)
   - Add examples to docs/
   - Document Go-specific edge cases
   - Create troubleshooting guide

## Known Limitations

1. **Go Toolchain Dependency**: Full features require `go` command in PATH
2. **Fallback Mode**: Regex-based parsing has limitations for complex Go syntax
3. **Module Path Resolution**: Simple path-based resolution (no module proxy support)
4. **Import Rewriting**: Uses string replacement (could be AST-based for safety)

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](../../../CONTRIBUTING.md) for:
- Code standards
- Testing requirements
- PR process
- Logging guidelines

## License

Same as parent project (check repository root)

---

**Status: Production Ready ✅**

Last updated: 2025-10-05

Commit message:

docs: Add comprehensive language plugin implementation guide
Add crates/languages/README.md with complete guide for implementing
new language plugins including:

- Plugin directory structure and file organization
- LanguageIntelligencePlugin trait schema (required & optional methods)
- Data types (ParsedSource, Symbol, ManifestData, Dependency)
- Cargo.toml dependencies and feature flags
- Plugin registration steps in language_plugin_registry.rs
- Implementation patterns (dual-mode with subprocess vs pure Rust)
- Structured logging standards
- Testing requirements
- Reference implementations (Rust, Go, TypeScript)
- Complete checklist for new plugin development

Update cross-references:
- CONTRIBUTING.md: Add "Adding New Language Plugins" section
- CLAUDE.md: Add plugin guide under "For Contributors"
- docs/architecture/ARCHITECTURE.md: Update plugin development section
- crates/languages/cb-lang-go/README.md: Reference new guide

Remove obsolete documentation:
- Delete 01_PROPOSAL_LANG_CRATE.md (replaced by actual implementation guide)

This provides a single source of truth for plugin development that
replaces the outdated proposal with current implementation details.

crates/languages/cb-lang-go/README.md, after:

# cb-lang-go - Go Language Plugin for Codebuddy

Complete Go language support plugin implementing the `LanguageIntelligencePlugin` trait.

## Features

### ✅ Import Analysis
- Full AST-based import parsing using Go's native parser
- Fallback regex-based parsing when `go` command is unavailable
- Support for all Go import styles:
  - Single imports: `import "fmt"`
  - Grouped imports: `import ( "fmt"; "os" )`
  - Aliased imports: `import f "fmt"`
  - Dot imports: `import . "fmt"`
  - Blank imports: `import _ "database/sql"`
- External dependency detection
- Complete `ImportGraph` generation with metadata

### ✅ Symbol Extraction
- AST-based symbol extraction for:
  - Functions (regular and methods)
  - Structs
  - Interfaces
  - Constants
  - Variables
  - Type aliases
- Documentation comment extraction
- Method receiver detection
- Graceful fallback when Go toolchain unavailable (returns empty list)

### ✅ Manifest Support (go.mod)
- Complete `go.mod` parsing:
  - Module directive
  - Go version directive
  - Require directives (direct and indirect dependencies)
  - Replace directives (local path and module replacements)
  - Exclude directives
- Dependency extraction and categorization
- Dependency version updates
- Manifest generation for new modules

### ✅ Refactoring Support
- Module file location for Go package layout
- Import statement parsing from files
- Import rewriting for file renames
- Module reference finding with configurable scope
- Manifest generation

## Architecture

The plugin uses a **dual-mode approach** for maximum compatibility:

### 1. AST Mode (Primary)
- Embeds `resources/ast_tool.go` as a subprocess tool
- Leverages Go's native `go/ast` and `go/parser` packages
- Provides accurate parsing with full language support
- Requires Go toolchain to be installed

### 2. Regex Mode (Fallback)
- Pure Rust regex-based parsing
- Works in environments without Go installed
- Handles basic import detection
- Symbol extraction returns empty list in fallback mode

This ensures the plugin **works everywhere** while providing full features when Go is available.

## Project Structure

```
crates/languages/cb-lang-go/
├── Cargo.toml              # Dependencies and package metadata
├── README.md               # This file
├── resources/
│   └── ast_tool.go         # Embedded Go AST analysis tool (354 lines)
└── src/
    ├── lib.rs              # Main plugin implementation (280 lines)
    ├── manifest.rs         # go.mod parsing and manipulation (657 lines)
    └── parser.rs           # Import and symbol extraction (357 lines)
```

**Total: ~1,648 lines of code (including tests and docs)**

## Implementation Status

| Feature | Status | Lines | Tests |
|---------|--------|-------|-------|
| Symbol extraction | ✅ Complete | 108 | ✅ |
| Import parsing | ✅ Complete | 253 | ✅ |
| Manifest parsing | ✅ Complete | 416 | ✅ 9 tests |
| Dependency updates | ✅ Complete | 64 | ✅ |
| Manifest generation | ✅ Complete | 7 | ✅ |
| Module file location | ✅ Complete | 48 | ⚠️ Integration needed |
| Import rewriting | ✅ Complete | 38 | ⚠️ Integration needed |
| Module references | ✅ Complete | 48 | ⚠️ Integration needed |

**Overall: 95% Complete** (needs integration tests)

## Usage

### Parsing Go Source

```rust
use cb_lang_go::GoPlugin;
use cb_plugin_api::LanguageIntelligencePlugin;

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let plugin = GoPlugin::new();

    let source = r#"
    package main

    import "fmt"

    // HelloWorld prints hello
    func HelloWorld() {
        fmt.Println("Hello, World!")
    }

    // User represents a user
    type User struct {
        Name string
        Age  int
    }

    const MaxUsers = 100
    "#;

    // Parse and extract symbols
    let parsed = plugin.parse(source).await?;

    for symbol in &parsed.symbols {
        println!("{:?} {} at line {}", symbol.kind, symbol.name, symbol.location.line);
    }
    // Output:
    // Function HelloWorld at line 7
    // Struct User at line 12
    // Constant MaxUsers at line 17

    Ok(())
}
```

### Analyzing go.mod

```rust
use cb_lang_go::GoPlugin;
use cb_plugin_api::LanguageIntelligencePlugin;
use std::path::Path;

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let plugin = GoPlugin::new();

    let manifest = plugin.analyze_manifest(Path::new("go.mod")).await?;

    println!("Module: {}", manifest.name);
    println!("Go version: {}", manifest.version);

    for dep in &manifest.dependencies {
        println!("Dependency: {}", dep.name);
    }

    Ok(())
}
```

### Updating Dependencies

```rust
use cb_lang_go::GoPlugin;
use cb_plugin_api::LanguageIntelligencePlugin;
use std::path::Path;

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let plugin = GoPlugin::new();

    let updated_content = plugin
        .update_dependency(
            Path::new("go.mod"),
            "github.com/user/old",
            "github.com/user/new",
            Some("v1.2.3")
        )
        .await?;

    println!("Updated go.mod:\n{}", updated_content);

    Ok(())
}
```

## Testing

### Run Unit Tests

```bash
cargo test -p cb-lang-go
```

**Current results: 12 tests passing ✅**

```
running 12 tests
test manifest::tests::test_generate_manifest ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_go_mod_with_indirect ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_simple_go_mod ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_exclude ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_replace_with_version ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_go_mod_with_replace ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_parse_single_line_require ... ok
test manifest::tests::test_update_dependency ... ok
test parser::tests::test_is_external_dependency ... ok
test parser::tests::test_parse_go_imports_regex ... ok
test parser::tests::test_extract_symbols_graceful_fallback ... ok
test parser::tests::test_analyze_imports ... ok
```

### Run Clippy

```bash
cargo clippy -p cb-lang-go
```

Note: There's a pending clippy warning in `cb-plugin-api` (unused `Arc` import) that's outside the scope of this crate.

## Structured Logging

All logging follows the structured key-value format per `docs/development/LOGGING_GUIDELINES.md`:

```rust
// ✅ Correct structured logging
debug!(module = %go_mod.module, dependencies_count = dependencies.len(), "Parsed go.mod successfully");
warn!(dependency = %dep_name, "Dependency not found in go.mod");
debug!(error = %e, "Go AST parsing failed, falling back to regex");
```

**Compliance: 100%** - All 6 log statements use structured format ✅

## Dependencies

```toml
[dependencies]
# Codebuddy workspace
cb-plugin-api = { path = "../../cb-plugin-api" }
cb-protocol = { path = "../../cb-protocol" }

# Async
async-trait = { workspace = true }
tokio = { workspace = true }

# Serialization
serde = { workspace = true }
serde_json = { workspace = true }

# Go-specific
regex = "1.10"           # Fallback import parsing
tempfile = "3.10"        # Temp dir for ast_tool.go
chrono = { version = "0.4", features = ["serde"] }

# Error handling
thiserror = { workspace = true }

# Logging
tracing = { workspace = true }
```

## Plugin Registration

The plugin is automatically registered in:
- `crates/cb-handlers/src/language_plugin_registry.rs:40`
- `crates/cb-services/src/services/file_service.rs:67` (tests)

```rust
registry.register(Arc::new(cb_lang_go::GoPlugin::new()));
```

## Comparison with Rust Plugin

| Metric | Rust Plugin | Go Plugin | Status |
|--------|-------------|-----------|--------|
| **Total LOC** | 1,346 lines | 1,294 lines | ✅ Comparable |
| **Files** | 3 (lib, parser, manifest) | 3 (lib, parser, manifest) | ✅ Same structure |
| **Symbol extraction** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| **Manifest support** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| **Import parsing** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| **Refactoring methods** | ✅ 8 methods | ✅ 8 methods | ✅ Full parity |
| **Test coverage** | ✅ 9 tests | ✅ 12 tests | ✅ Excellent |
| **Documentation** | ✅ Complete | ✅ Complete | ✅ Comprehensive |

**Result: Full feature parity achieved ✅**

## Next Steps

### Recommended Improvements

1. **Integration Tests** (1-2 hours)
   - Add integration tests using real Go projects
   - Test with actual MCP tool calls
   - Verify end-to-end workflows

2. **Performance Optimization** (Optional)
   - Cache ast_tool.go process between calls
   - Reuse temp directory for multiple operations
   - Benchmark symbol extraction performance

3. **Enhanced Error Messages** (Optional)
   - Add more context to parse errors
   - Include file path in error messages
   - Provide suggestions for common issues

4. **Documentation** (Optional)
   - Add examples to docs/
   - Document Go-specific edge cases
   - Create troubleshooting guide

## Known Limitations

1. **Go Toolchain Dependency**: Full features require `go` command in PATH
2. **Fallback Mode**: Regex-based parsing has limitations for complex Go syntax
3. **Module Path Resolution**: Simple path-based resolution (no module proxy support)
4. **Import Rewriting**: Uses string replacement (could be AST-based for safety)

## Contributing

For creating new language plugins, see the **[Language Plugins Guide](../README.md)** which covers:
- Plugin structure and schema requirements
- `LanguageIntelligencePlugin` trait implementation
- Plugin registration steps
- Testing and logging standards

For general contribution guidelines, see [CONTRIBUTING.md](../../../CONTRIBUTING.md):
- Code standards
- PR process

## License

Same as parent project (check repository root)

---

**Status: Production Ready ✅**

Last updated: 2025-10-05
